Next up we're continuing along with more advanced function concepts.
We have this big word or a big phrase higher order functions.
It simply refers to functions that operate on or with other functions.
So functions that either accept functions as arguments and use them or do something with them or on
the other side of things a function that returns another function.
So I'm going to show both of them we're going to start with the first example or the first type function
that accepts a function as an argument.
This is a really common pattern in JavaScript and we'll see a bunch of examples in a bunch of built
in methods where we pass functions in as arguments but we're gonna start by defining our own.
So this is a very simple function called called twice and it accepts an argument that I'm calling func.
That's just the parameter name I've decided on.
It could be anything as long as it's a valid javascript identifier and then I'm executing that argument
twice.
So if I have a function called laugh and I call twice the function call twice and I pass in life it
will call laugh two times.
So let me demonstrate this.
All define a function called call three times and we'll pass a function to it.
We can call it F just to make it different instead of func and will execute F one time two times three
times and then let's define some other function whether it's laugh scream cry Let's go with cry and
it will console that log boo hoo I'm so sad like that and now I can use it.
I can use call three times.
I mean I can call cry on my own just like this.
Of course that should be review but I can also run call three times I'll expand this a bit and pass
in.
Cry cry is a function I'm passing it into this function and then this function executes it three times
in a row and there we go.
Boo hoo I'm so sad.
One time two times three times if we instead did it with a different function.
How about instead of cry we do rage and we'll console dialogue.
I hate everything
if we call three times and pass in rage.
I hate everything I hate everything I hate everything.
Let's do another example this time we'll write a function let's call it repeat or repeat n times and
we'll pass in a function and a number and then it will call that function and number of times.
So I'm going to define this function.
Repeat and times and we'll pass in a function which I'll call func or we could call it action just to
be different.
So you can see it truly does not matter.
Just any parameter name that's valid it can store a function it can store a string it will store whatever
we pass in JavaScript doesn't care and then we'll pass in a number which we'll call num what we're going
to do is loop Num Times and each time through call for let eye is equal to let's go upwards so zero
is less than num I plus plus it doesn't matter we're just looping a number of times num number of times
and we'll call action each time in that loop then to use this function I'll reinstate cry and rage and
now I can call something like repeat end times rage and I'll repeat it 13 times so I'm passing in the
function rage it's called action in this function and we are looping 13 times each time through we're
executing whatever action was passed in what happens over here 13 I hate everything annoyingly chrome
console condenses them you have to trust me it happened 13 times if we instead of come over here but
if we instead change it to eleven times we get eleven consoles out logs if instead of rage I'm calling
cry we get 19 boo hoo.
I'm so sad.
Printed out in our console and for one more example let's write a function called randomly pick a randomly
caller.
I don't know.
Well we'll figure out a name it will accept two functions and it will randomly call one of them but
not both.
So I will comment this out.
We can leave it.
I'll just come at this lineup.
Well define our function which I still haven't come up with a good name.
Let's go with pick one or call one.
Pick one is fine and will pass and function one and function two and then we need to write logic to
randomly pick one of these values.
So the most common way of doing this is to pick a random number and if that number is let's say the
numbers between 0 and 1.
If it's less than point 5 we'll do one thing if it's greater than point 5 or do another.
So let's pick a random number we'll go with Rand equals math dot random and we'll keep it as a decimal
and then we'll just write some logic if Rand is less than zero point five.
We'll call function 1 and I'll expand this to make it clearer.
Else if it's greater than point 5 we'll call.
Function 2 and that's it.
Function 1 in function 2.
We'll only call one of them depending on what Rand is.
So if we consider log Rand and then we try calling pick one which I'll just do it over here I'll call.
Pick one and pass in.
Cry and rage.
Turns out that our random number was point nine zero point nine blah blah blah.
So it ran.
RAGE I hate everything.
We'll try it again this time.
Our Random number was zero point 3 8 and it ran cry so each time it picks one of them.
So there you have it.
Three examples of calling functions that are passed as arguments so a function call three times accepts
another function as an argument and we execute it three times in the body of call three times.
Here's another one.
Repeat and times it accepts an action and a number.
It loops no times or Num Times let's say 9 times and it calls whatever this function is that number
of times.
And then we also have pick one which accepts two functions and randomly decides which one to call.
None of these may seem that useful.
But as you'll see very shortly javascript comes with a ton of built in methods especially with arrays
where we perform a function for every element in an array.
So that's coming up shortly but we still need to talk about the other type of higher order function.
We talked about functions that accept functions as arguments.
Next we'll see functions that can return a function as the return value.